Add Programming model documentation (#3432)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/reference/programming_model.rst

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes the HIP programming model, the contract
                between the programmer and the compiler/runtime executing the
                code.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, C++ language extensions

*******************************************************************************
Programming Model
*******************************************************************************

HIP defines a model of mapping SIMT programs (Single Instruction, Multiple
Threads) onto various architectures, primarily GPUs. While the model may be
expressed in most imperative languages, (eg. Python via PyHIP) this document
will focus on the original C/C++ API of HIP.

Threading Model
===============================================================================

The SIMT nature of HIP is captured by the ability to execute user-provided
device programs, expressed as single-source C/C++ functions or sources compiled

> online/offline to binaries in bulk.

Reviewer: What does "in bulk" mean here? Is it relating to the fact that it is executed in a highly parallel way? That might be more of a property of the gpus, not HIP.

Author: Bulk here indeed refers to the massively parallel nature of the kernel launch, more specifically that the runtime doesn't track kernels independently, but identifies the entire launch as one entity. The language "bulk" is borrowed from ISO C++ [A Unified Executors Proposal for C++ | P0443R12](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2020/p0443r12.html) which standardizes this behavior under the `bulk_executor` type.

> Multiple instances of the device program (aka. kernel) may execute in parallel,

Reviewer: It might be useful defining the term thread here (which you basically already did). E.g.
```suggestion
Multiple instances of the device program (aka. kernel), so called threads, may execute in parallel,
```
but this suggestion seems a bit hard to read

all uniquely identified by a set of integral values which are referred to as

> thread IDs. The set of integers identifying a thread relate to the hierarchy in

Reviewer: Being pedantic: It is not exactly clear what you mean here. If by thread ID you mean `threadIdx`, then they don't globally uniquely identify the thread. However if you mean the set of `blockIdx` and `threadIdx`, then this holds true, but I wouldn't refer to them as "thread IDs". Also `threadIdx` doesn't (fully) relate to the hierarchy in which the threads execute.

I'd suggest just ommiting the second part
```suggestion
all uniquely identified by a set of integral values. The set of integers identifying a thread relate to the hierarchy in
```

which threads execute.

.. _inherent_thread_model:

Inherent Thread Model
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> The thread hiearchy inherent to how AMD GPUs operate manifest as depicted in

Reviewer: Using simpler words and a typo:
```suggestion
The thread hierarchy inherent to how AMD GPUs operate is depicted in
```

:numref:`inherent_thread_hierarchy`.

.. _inherent_thread_hierarchy:

> .. figure:: ../data/reference/programming_model/thread_hierarchy.svg

Reviewer: It would be nice to add in the description and alt text, that the arrows represent threads

Actually, when being pedantic: the blocks don't logically consist of warps, that's just how they are executed on the hardware. It would be more precise if the blocks contained the threads directly. This could also convey the wrong idea, that the amount of threads in a block has to be a multiple of a warp (which is of course advisable, but by no means necessary)

Author: While I do agree with the sentiment of not conflating the physical realization from the logical structure, I don't agree with warps not being part of the API. Warp-collective functions explicitly operate at this granularity, and if the notion isn't introduced, it can't be referred to by those functions.

A block consisting of warps where the last has unnecessary threads is a valid concern though. We may mention that in text. Highlighting that capability in image may be too much in the opposite direction: encouraging using the API as such.

Reviewer: I'd still say that first and foremost (thread) blocks are a group of threads. When using warp-level functions, the user is required to take care of making sure that the right threads participate, so it is not as straight forward, especially as there is no built in "warpIdx".

And, even though we don't have to conform to that, the cuda programming guide doesn't even mention warps in its programming model chapter at all. It first explains it in the chapter about hardware implementation. Granted, those chapters can be interleaved somewhat, and I would also argue, that warps should be mentioned here, for completeness sake, but they don't belong in the thread hierarchy. There is no address space or anything related to warps, that makes them stand out. Anything you can do on a warp level should also be possible on a block level, just not as efficient/performant

Reviewer: Added a sentence mentioning threads, at least. I'll open another issue to keep track of this - this image should be updated

  :alt: Diagram depicting nested rectangles of varying color. The outermost one
        titled "Grid", inside sets of uniform rectangles layered on oneanother
        titled "Block". Each "Block" containing sets of uniform rectangles

>         layered on oneanother titled "Warp". Each of the "Warp" titled

Reviewer: "typo"
```suggestion
        titled "Grid", inside sets of uniform rectangles layered on one another
        titled "Block". Each "Block" containing sets of uniform rectangles
        layered on one another titled "Warp". Each of the "Warp" titled
```
Or thinking about it, shouldn't it be:
```suggestion
        titled "Grid", inside sets of uniform rectangles layered on top of each other
        titled "Block". Each "Block" containing sets of uniform rectangles
        layered on top of each other titled "Warp". Each of the "Warp" titled
```

Reviewer: Addendum: The passive voice might not be the best choice here, as it could also be misunderstood. Also the layering of the rectangles on top of each other might not be as important, the layout (4 rectangles layed out in 2 rows and 2 columns) also hasn't been explained, and I think that's not the important part this image has to convey, but rather the relation of blocks being contained in the grid and warps being contained in the block

Author: The layering wishes to accentuate the multi-dimensional indexing of blocks/threads.

        rectangles filled with downward pointing arrows inside.

  Hierarchy of thread groups.

* The innermost grouping is called a warp, or a wavefront in ISA terms. A warp
  is the most tightly coupled groups of threads, both physically and logically.

  When referring to threads inside a warp, they may be called lanes, and the

>   integral value identifying them the lane ID. Lane IDs aren't quieried like

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
  integral value identifying them the lane ID. Lane IDs aren't queried like
```

  other thread IDs, but are user-calculated. As a consequence they are only as
  multi-dimensional as the user interprets the calculated values to be.

  The size of a warp is architecture dependent and always fixed. Warps are
  signified by the set of communication primitives at their disposal, detailed
  under :ref:`warp_cross_lane_functions`.

* The middle grouping is called a block or thread block. The defining feature
  of a block is that all threads in a block will share an instance of memory

>   which they may use to share data or synchronize with oneanother.

Reviewer: Typo - several occurences in the file
```suggestion
  which they may use to share data or synchronize with one another.
```

>   which they may use to share data or synchronize with oneanother.

Reviewer: Is shared memory really the defining feature of a thread block? Blocks don't even have to use shared memory. Maybe the fact that the threads in a block "run in parallel" is a better defining feature. Of course shared memory is still an important aspect

Author: In OpenCL it definitely is, and I'm not aware of it being any different in HIP. It may not be explicitly stated, but I'm not aware of runtimes being allowed at treating them otherwise: allowing a block to span multiple CUs (even when not using shared memory). The maximum block size is limited by the program counters of a given CU, which also happen to share the shared memory. (IMHO OpenCL does this better by explicitly nailing this down.)

> Compute Unit
>
>    An OpenCL device has one or more compute units. A work-group executes on a single compute unit. A compute unit is composed of one or more processing elements and local memory. A compute unit may also include dedicated texture filter units that can be accessed by its processing elements.
>
> Work-group
>
>    A collection of related work-items that execute on a single compute unit. The work-items in the group execute the same kernel-instance and share local memory and work-group functions.

Reviewer: Changed the description - blocks need to run on a single CU. The need for shared memory is not good enough, then the whole grid could be seen as a block, as it shares the global memory, even if that would be slow. The possibility of synchronizing on a finer grained level is definitely more important, and that doesn't even necessarily require shared memory.

  The size of a block is user-configurable but is maxmized by the queryable

>   capabilites of the executing hardware. The unique ID of the thread within a

Reviewer: Typos
```suggestion
  The size of a block is user-configurable but is maximized by the queryable
  capabilities of the executing hardware. The unique ID of the thread within a
```
Or maybe better wording:

```suggestion
  The size of a block is user-configurable up to a maximum that depends
  on the executing hardware. The unique ID of the thread within a
```
Something along those lines, I might not have used the best wording. I just want to avoid the notion, that the block size is something that must be maximized. (Also it not only depends on the hardware, but also the resource requirements of the kernel, but that might be secondary here)

>   block is 3-dimensional as provided by the API. When linearizing thread IDs

Reviewer: Is this the appropriate point to actually mention what API function this is? This might help get a better connection between the model and what it actually looks like in code.

Reviewer: Added the actual function

  within a block, assume the "fast index" being dimension ``x``, followed by
  the ``y`` and ``z`` dimensions.

* The outermost grouping is called a grid. A grid manifests as a single

>   dispatch of kernels for execution. The unique ID of each block within a grid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  dispatch of a kernel for execution. The unique ID of each block within a grid
```

>   is 3-dimensional, as provided by the API and is queryable by every thread

Reviewer: Again: should the actual function be mentioned here?

Reviewer: Added the actual function

  within the block.

> 

Reviewer: For the upper section: Nice explanation, but I'm missing, that the hierarchy is just plainly stated: A grid is made up of (several) blocks, a block is made up of (several) threads.

The fact that threads are grouped in warps is important, but not a direct consequence of the thread model of hip.

This way the logic of the section could actually be reversed, explaining from top down - a grid consists of blocks, blocks consist of threads. But this does not necessarily have to be changed, the other approach is just as fine, whichever fits better.

Author: Top-down and bottom-up explanation could both be done.

Again, if there were no explicit warp-collective primitives in the API, I'd also say they're implementation detail, but I think they're not.

Reviewer: One could argue that warps are an implementation detail in the sense, that their size is not defined - an architecture with a warp size of one is imaginable as well

Cooperative Groups Thread Model
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Cooperative Groups API introduces new APIs to launch, group, subdivide,
synchronize and identify threads, as well as some predefined group-collective
algorithms, but most importantly a matching threading model to think in terms
of. It relaxes some of the restrictions of the :ref:`inherent_thread_model`
imposed by the strict 1:1 mapping of architectural details to the programming
model.

The rich set of APIs introduced by Cooperative Groups allow the programmer
to define their own groups based on run-time predicates, but a set of implicit

> groups manifest based on kernel launch parameters.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I fully understand this "but" here - is it a restriction, or an additional set of implicit groups?

Also, but this might just be me again, the use of the word "to manifest" throws me off in the reading flow a bit

Author: I think the first "but" is understandable. The second paragraph needs a rewrite/clarification.

Author: Fixed.

> The thread hiearchy abstraction of Cooperative Groups manifest as depicted in

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
The thread hierarchy abstraction of Cooperative Groups manifest as depicted in
```
And another "manifest" ;) if it's not for reading flow (which might be personal to me) at least replace some of them for the sake of reducing repetition :)

:numref:`coop_thread_hierarchy`.

.. _coop_thread_hierarchy:

.. figure:: ../data/reference/programming_model/thread_hierarchy_coop.svg
  :alt: Diagram depicting nested rectangles of varying color. The outermost one
        titled "Grid", inside sets of different sized rectangles layered on
        oneanother titled "Block". Each "Block" containing sets of uniform
        rectangles layered on oneanother titled "Warp". Each of the "Warp"

>         titled rectangles filled with downward pointing arrows inside.

Reviewer: This alt text is not fully accurate, the outermost rectangle is called "Multi Grid", and there are no warps in this picture (which is good that way imo).
I think this is just a copy-paste mistake, but just to make sure: this should convey, that the grids can have different amounts and layouts of blocks (here the layout is actually important, compared to the first figure)

The remarks from the first one also mostly apply - the passive voice makes this harder to understand.

Author: Needs fix.

Reviewer: Fixed

  Cooperative group thread hierarchy.

* Multi Grid is an abstraction of potentially multiple simultaneous launches of
  the same kernel over multiple devices. Grids inside a multi device kernel
  launch need not be of uniform size, thus allowing taking into account
  different device capabilities and preferences.

>   .. deprecated:: 5.0

Reviewer: The rendered note does not make it fully clear, which part is deprecated

Author: Fixing...

Author: Fixed.

* Same as the :ref:`inherent_thread_model` Grid entity. The ability to
  synchronize over a grid requires the kernel to be launched using the
  Cooperative Groups API.

* The defining feature of a cluster or block cluster is that all threads in a
  cluster will share a common set of distributed shared memory which they may
  use to share data or synchronize with oneanother.

> * Same as the :ref:`inherent_thread_model` Block entity.

Reviewer: The usage of "Same as [...]" does not say, *what* is actually the same

Using [definition lists](https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#definition-lists) would make this way easier to understand than a simple bullet-point list. The Inherent Thread Model explanation would also benefit from this. This might require some text to be adjusted, but I think it would be worth it

Author: Fixing...

Author: Fixed.

.. note::

  Explicit warp-level thread handling is absent from the Cooperative Groups API.
  In order to exploit the known hardware SIMD width on which built-in
  functionality translates to simpler logic, one may use the group partitioning

>   part of the API, typically but not necessarily ``tiled_partition``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  part of the API, typically, but not necessarily, ``tiled_partition``.
```

Also: this is a weird statement. What else could be used for that? Is the API really that inconsistent? Not sure what to do here, but this threw me off, when reading it.

Memory Model
===============================================================================

The hierarchy of threads introduced by :ref:`inherent_thread_model` is induced
by the memory subsystem of GPUs. :numref:`memory_hierarchy` summarizes that memory namespaces and
how they relate to the various levels of the threading model.

.. _memory_hierarchy:

.. figure:: ../data/reference/programming_model/memory_hierarchy.svg

>   :alt: Diagram depicting nested rectangles of varying color. The outermost one
>         titled "Grid", inside on the upper half a rectangle titled "Cluster".
>         Inside it are two identical rectangles titled "Block", inside them are
>         ones titled "Local" with multiple "Warp" titled rectangles. Blocks have

Reviewer: Same criticism as earlier, this being written in passive makes it harder to understand.
Actually, this one has a good example of how to make it less ambiguous - by adding "it" after "inside", it already makes a huge difference. Compare:
```suggestion
  :alt: Diagram depicting nested rectangles of varying color. The outermost one
        titled "Grid", inside (of it) on the upper half (is) a rectangle titled "Cluster".
        Inside it are two identical rectangles titled "Block", inside them are
        ones titled "Local" with multiple "Warp" titled rectangles. Blocks have
```

Reviewer: Fixed

        not just Local inside, but also rectangles titled "Shared". The Shared
        rectangles of Blocks in the same Cluster are grouped together with a
        translucent halo titled "Cluster shared". Outside the Cluster but
        inside the Grid is a rectangle titled "Global" with three others
        inside: "Surface", "Texture" (same color) and "Constant" (different
        color).

  Memory hierarchy.

> 

Reviewer: Same as earlier: a definition list gives more clarity on what part is being explained

Author: Fixed.

> * Local or per-thread memory is read-write storage only visible to the
>   threads defining the given variables. The size of a block for a given kernel,
>   the number of concurrent warps are limited by local memory usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Local or per-thread memory is read-write storage only visible to the
  thread defining the given variables. The size of a block for a given kernel,
  and thereby the number of concurrently running warps, are limited by local memory usage.
```
Due to this explanation I'd argue, that the depiction in figure three is wrong - "Local" should not surround the warps (which probably shouldn't even be in that figure), but should only surround one single thread.

Author: Needs extra text or clearer depiction in image. (note to self: register file)

Reviewer: I'll add an issue for it

  This relates to an important aspect: occupancy. This is the default memory
  namespace.

* Shared memory is read-write storage visible to all the threads in a given
  block.

* Distributed shared memory is read-write storage visible to all the threads
  in a given block cluster.

* Global memory is read-write storage visible to all threads in a given grid.
  There are specialized versions of global memory with different usage
  semantics which are typically backed by the same hardware storing global.

  * Constant memory is read-only storage visible to all threads in a given
    grid. It is a limited segment of global with queryable size.

  * Texture memory is read-only storage visible to all threads in a given grid
    and accessible through additional APIs.

  * Surface is a writable version of texture memory.

Execution Model
===============================================================================

HIP programs consist of two distinct scopes:

> * The host-side API running on the host processor. There are to APIs available:

Reviewer: :)
```suggestion
* The host-side API running on the host processor. There are two APIs available:
```

  * The HIP runtime API which enables use of the single-source programming
    model.

  * The HIP driver API which sits at a lower level and most importantly differs
    by removing some of the facilities provided by the runtime API, most
    importantly around kernel launching and argument setting. It is geared
    towards implementing abstractions atop, such as the runtime API itself.

* The device-side kernels running on GPUs. Both the host and the device-side

>   APIs have synchronous and asynchronous functions in them.

Reviewer: Since this is a nested list of each "two" points (two distinct "scopes", two "APIs") I'd think making this a bit more visually appealing could help avoiding mixing this up. A definition list or a numbered list for the "outer" list could help.

And also changing "The host-side API running on the host processor" to just "The host-side running on the host processor", so that it won't be confused with the immediately following "two APIs available"

Also it doesn't really help, that the earlier mentioned "scopes" are actually "APIs", which might make it easier to confuse the nested lists.

Reviewer: Slightly changed/reworded

> * The device-side kernels running on GPUs. Both the host and the device-side
>   APIs have synchronous and asynchronous functions in them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The device-side kernels running on GPUs.

Both the host and the device-side APIs have synchronous and asynchronous functions in them.
```
This statement should be separated from the device-side, as it talks about both points.

Host-side execution
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The part of the host-side API which deals with device management and their
queries are synchronous. All asynchronous APIs, such as kernel execution, data
movement and potentially data allocation/freeing all happen in the context of
device streams.

> Streams are FIFO buffers of commands to execute relating to a given device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Streams are FIFO buffers of commands to execute on a given device.
```

Commands which enqueue tasks on a stream all return promptly and the command is
executed asynchronously. All side-effects of a command on a stream are visible
to all subsequent commands on the same stream. Multiple streams may point to
the same device and those streams may be fed from multiple concurrent host-side
threads. Execution on multiple streams may be concurrent but isn't required to
be.

Asynchronous APIs involving a stream all return a stream event which may be
used to synchronize the execution of multiple streams. A user may enqueue a

> barrier onto a stream referencing an event. The barrier will will block until

Reviewer: :)
```suggestion
barrier onto a stream referencing an event. The barrier will block until
```

> the command related to the event does not complete, at which point all

Reviewer: Shouldn't it be waiting until it completes?

```suggestion
the command related to the event does complete, at which point all
```

Author: Should say "event completes".

Reviewer: Ok. Just realized it should also be "all the command`s`", just so you don't overlook it when fixing it

Author: Fixed.

side-effects of the command shall be visible to commands following the barrier,

> even if those side-effects manifest on different devices.

Reviewer: This "manifest" is actually fine, I think because here it is easy to figure out whether the verb or the noun is meant 😅

Device-side execution
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The SIMT programming model behind the HIP device-side execution is a
middle-ground between SMT (Simultaneous Multi-Threading) programming known from
multi-core CPUs, and SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) programming
mostly known from exploiting relevant instruction sets on CPUs (eg.
SSE/AVX/Neon).

A HIP device compiler maps our SIMT code written in HIP C++ to an inherently
SIMD architecture (like GPUs) not by exploiting data parallelism within a
single instance of a kernel and spreading identical instructions over the SIMD
engines at hand, but by scalarizing the entire kernel and issuing the scalar
instructions of multiple kernel instances to each of the SIMD engine lanes.

Kernel launch
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kernels may be launched in multiple ways all with different syntaxes and
intended use-cases.

* Using the triple-chevron ``<<<...>>>`` operator on a ``__global__`` annotated
  function.

* Using ``hipLaunchKernelGGL()`` on a ``__global__`` annotated function.

  .. tip::

>     This name by default is a macro expanding to triple-chevron. In cases where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ``hipLaunchKernelGGL()`` by default is a macro expanding to triple-chevron. In cases where
```

    language syntax extensions are undesirable, or where launching templated
    and/or overloaded kernel functions define the
    ``HIP_TEMPLATE_KERNEL_LAUNCH`` preprocessor macro before including the HIP
    headers to turn it into a templated function.

* Using the

>   :doxygen:`launch APIs supporting the triple-chevron syntax <Clang>` directly.

Reviewer: This does not seem as if it's supposed to look this way. Especially in the rendered version.

Reviewer: Couldn't fix it either, not even sure what the original target of this was - removed the reference

  .. caution::

    These APIs are intended to be used/generated by tools such as the HIP

>     compiler itself and not intended towards end-user code. Should you be

Reviewer: This feels slightly easier to understand
```suggestion
    compiler itself and not by end-user code. Should you be
```

Author: Separate out "generate" and "used" for the two parts of the sentence.

Reviewer: Then I think 
```suggestion
    compiler itself and not intended for end-user code. Should you be
```
is still easier to understand
